a business empire needs decisive
leadership but also a steady hand for
over 40 years Charlie Munger has been
the ladder for Berkshire Hathaway as
Berkshires vice-chairman the 95 year old
Munger is Warren Buffett's right-hand
man
he's also an investing legend in his own
right Munger ran a firm in the 1960s and
70s that scored returns of over 24% per
year
he's here to talk about how to make
investment decisions and life choices
that help secure prosperity and
longevity
[Music]
I'm Andy serwer welcome to influencers
and welcome to our guests vice chairman
of Berkshire Hathaway Charlie Munger
Charlie nice to see it to be here so you
just had the Annual Meeting and I have
to ask you what your favorite moments of
that were what I like is that both the
shareholders and the employees aperture
are so extremely enthusiastic and it's
not just that they've made a lot of
money and have nice careers they think
they're on the right side and you know
they come there to hear you guys talk
all day and yes like a cult it's like a
cult
yeah in a good way though you know good
coke that's a good coke okay I mean in
the stuff that they hear some of its new
some of its old and a lot of it is
common sense and you were talking all of
those common sense right but of course
when people use the word common sense
what they mean is uncommon sense because
the standard human condition is
ignorance and stupidity
they say old Joe has common sense they
mean as he has uncommon sense I guess
it's a bit of a misnomer then but really
is so you know why is it that people
can't think clearly about investing or
decisions in their lives
well they don't think very well about
sex or gambling either no I standard
human condition is a lot of Miskin and
there are ways to make hay of that or
yes you take advantage of other people
you can improve your own life by
eliminating your miss cognitions let me
shift gears a little bit charlie and ask
you about the US economy and what is
your take on where things are right now
well obviously they're booming but you
know the economy sometimes booms and
sometimes it doesn't and you have to
live your life through both episodes and
all right to do is we just keep swimming
and sometimes the tide is with us and
sometimes against
and but we keep swimming either way are
you surprised by how long this expansion
has last its lasts a long time but what
was really remarkable isn't it we never
printed money so much and spell it so
fast and bought back so much debt public
and private so this is total terra
incognita in economics and now I know
what he knew for sure how it was gonna
work
so is it risky then of course it was
risky but it worked
and they I don't think they had much
else they it would work they weren't set
up to do stimulus to much controversy
Democratic inertia somewhere so they had
to do something and all they had left
was just a print money and start buying
things and that's what they did and it
turned out to be a very wise response
and what's even more remarkable is that
both Congress and the presidency and
under both parties made the same
decision they all cooperated it was the
last time but where is that going to
leave us ultimately well that left us
licking the Great Recession so try
cooperation again since it works so well
once how much is president Trump
responsible for this current economic
situation well I think he deserves some
credit but a lot of it just happened
economic cycle yeah and the decisions of
his predators predecessors what do you
think about the president's campaign to
lobby the Fed to lower rates or keep
rates low well I think presidents have
always done this if you're a politician
you know democracy of course you want
people to bring money in spender and of
course it's not a good idea
the best example probably in the whole
world is Singapore which has zero death
and never prints money and spends it
and it's one of the most successful
places on earth I wish we were like that
but but there's only one Singapore well
some people now say that federal debt is
not a problem at all well if you believe
that you believe in the Tooth Fairy
because then we don't have to have any
more taxes ever we'll just rent money
and live happily ever after it obviously
won't work so there comes a point when
printing money is counterproductive are
we at that point or you can no I don't
think we are at that point but nobody
knew where the point was going to come
and we don't know now none of these
people who are so pompously sure things
because we all want reassurance and so
they provide it but nobody really knows
how much of this is too much and do you
have any thoughts on Jay Powell and the
job that he's done well I think a lot of
it I think he's as good a choice as we
could have made one consequence of this
expansion or actually it precedes that
it's just something that's occurred in
our economy over the past 50 years
really has been wealth and income
inequality you know one do you see it as
a problem
two if so how do we address it well it's
a problem of enough politicians are
screaming about it that makes it a
problem it if it weren't for that this
one will go away by itself it happened
by accident we were in desperate trouble
we were on the eve of a Great Recession
that could have been a Great Depression
and then followed by the rise of people
like Adolf Hitler and so on and so on so
we hast a real catastrophe the only
weapon they had with this huge scale it
was to print money and spend it and they
did it well of course and they grow
interest rates down to zero or real
interest rates well of course that
lifted asset values for the people
already rich nobody was trying to make
the rich richer it just was an
accidental byproduct of a correct
governmental decision made it on a
bipartisan basis and since it was a
weird by-product that occurred in a
weird time it will go away by itself
Anouk
they'll go away by itself sure so
there's no reason for a lot of screaming
above they're idiots it's gonna go away
but so now that's not to say that we
can't raise the minimum wage a little
enlarge the social safety net oh we
should be doing that as we prosper both
parties agree on that what do you think
about the proposals put forth by
Alexandria Acacio Cortez and Elizabeth
Warren that would sort of greatly
address this problem well I don't
consider those two necessarily the best
prescribers in the world they're kind of
likable I particularly kinda like
Elizabeth Warren she's got a manner that
appeals to me really but I don't agree
with her her attitude I don't think
she's studied to Adam Smith enough and
what about AOC do you have any take on
her I don't think she knows who Adam
Smith was I want to ask you just a few
more questions about politics then we
can talk about the markets and Berkshire
a little bit more what about the
situation that we find ourselves in with
the Muller report and the way Congress
the Democrats are fixating on that and
the president's on the defensive what is
your thoughts thinking on that I tend to
avoid the whole subject
just as I ignore died with me tied
against and just keep swimming the both
parties are so partisan now that they're
blinded by their anger and I don't want
to be blinded by my anger so I control
it and I would recommend it to both
parties I want they should all cool with
it why are we so divided up charlie
right now in this country well anger
when you pound on one another feeds on
itself that's one of the great
difficulties with it it's the irrational
one feeds on itself
so I liked the world when I was Dwight
Eisenhower against Al Adlai Stevenson
and more civility and Ronald Reagan and
Tip O'Neill got along and and a lot it
was done my war was a bipartisan war and
in the aftermath foreign policy in the
United States was a bipartisan policy I
like that world better I hate this
extreme hatred on both sides will we
ever get back to those days or get two
new days where we don't have the hatred
probably you live long enough well the
good things happen a lot of bad things
happen fair enough
it's my understanding Charlie that you
were instrumental in helping Warren get
away from focusing on the cigar butt
form of investing and looked more
towards companies that I guess you could
call them branded companies better
businesses better businesses right yes
how did you help him make that decision
well it was perfectly obvious and he
made so much money and the other
technique it was hard for him to leave
something that worked so well but it was
not going to scale so he started looking
for investment values and great
businesses that were temporarily under
pressure it changed everything for the
better now we could scale up to the big
time our Apple and Amazon technology
companies are they bring in companies
both someone told me they asked Warren
if he could buy one brand this was about
40 years ago what that company what that
brand would be and he said Gillette
which makes sense what would that
company be today coca-cola still if you
take the amount of coca-cola drunk in
the world and the main flavor it's one
hell of a brand now it's such a
different product
from the stuff on the internet I don't
have the same my judgment would not be
as good on the Internet as it isn't
coca-cola I want to get back to Apple
Tim Cook was at the meeting yesterday he
was indeed did you get a chance to speak
with him I did can you tell us what you
guys talked about it nothing we
exchanged pleasantries but he's a
wonderful guy and of course it's a huge
record that he's building let me ask you
a little bit about Kraft Heinz and that
situation during the meeting yesterday
we found out that the chief marketing
officer was leaving the company did you
know that and what does that mean for
the company I knew nothing about in
advance what happened there was very
easy the matter is that Heinz ketchup
was a stronger brands and Kraft cheese
and they paid more for it so one
acquisition worked brilliantly and the
other worked poorly well welcome to
adult life it happens to everybody you
mentioned that you think that Tim Sloan
could still be or should still be the
CEO Wells Fargo yeah we're running the
world Tim Sloan would still be the CEO
of Wells Fargo
well why did he leave then well he made
this decision but he was being pushed
hard he did it for the benefit of the
company it was just so much of this
partisan hatred was washing off against
Wells Fargo it's understandable he was
there for a long time the company had
defrauded its own customers nobody was
seemingly being punished for it and some
people's minds listen to CEOs left under
pressure I regret that is a lot of
punishment so I don't think these people
were failing with their anger they
removed two CEOs and so and but now they
went out they it's like Tim Sloan was
not responsible for the crazy incentive
system
that created the trouble so they threw
him out the way you take out the
charwoman when you're ready to gambling
us that was getting back to coca-cola
you mentioned that it would be a bad
idea if it got into cannabis I mean why
not doesn't it make sense it's such a
wholesome brand associated with
happiness
why don't we want to associate with a
recreational drug that would be a
terrible idea
what about Boeing and the 737 max I mean
they're gonna fix that would you go
would you go on the plane after they
said it was fixed yes of course and they
will fix it well but I don't think it
was really a lot excusable that they
made the mistake I wouldn't ask you to
ollie a little bit about that was a
serious mistake you know sitting there
still working on it yeah they'll fix it
Boeing probably has the best safety
record in the world if you take 60 years
and this was a very unusual lapse there
may not be another one for 60 years is
that lapse symptomatic though or
indicative of us developing software
that's too powerful we don't understand
the consequences of it no I don't think
the problem was that I think it was just
an absolute lapse of being a big
bureaucracy you also mentioned at the
meeting yesterday doing billion dollar
deals overnight with very short
contracts
yeah we've always done that has that
ever blown up on you I can't think of a
single example in my whole life were
keeping it simple what has worked
against us we've made mistakes but they
weren't because we kept it simple and
that's simple it I would say that the
chief advantage that Berkshire has had
an accumulating a good record is that we
have avoided the pompous bureaucratic
systems
we've tried to give power to very
talented people and let them make very
quick decisions I want to ask you about
something that's talked about all the
time with you guys which is succession
and you talked about again you talked
about that all the time and there's been
countless barrels of ink spilled but if
you're getting older how do you make the
decision to step back if you may not
have the mental acuity to make that
decision well I think you'll be
surprised at how well both war and I are
capable of stepping back when when we
feel our powers are too far deteriorated
have you talked about that sure and Lord
has told people to speak up whether the
time comes if we've been rational all
this way you think we're not gonna try
and be rational right till the bitter
end
is the process I mean we're sort of in
the middle of the process you've been
giving more and more control or
authority to ajit and Greg and Todd and
Ted so it's sort of a continuum a
process just like that of course and by
the way it's working fine it's amazing
how good this next generation is so
they're steeped in our non-bureaucratic
ways there's these big bureaucracies
they think the work is done if you get
it out of your inbox and then to
somebody else's inbox that is not
getting it done getting it done is when
it's done not when it's in somebody
else's inbox
you know if everybody's in a big
committee meeting all the time you're
worn out at the end of the day you
haven't done anything
our Ted and Todd making all the stock
choices at this point no of course not
more I'm steps in and does big things
where do you think Charlie the biggest
opportunities are globally right now
well I don't think we have a master plan
of knowing where the opportunities are
we're trying to find intelligent things
to do with a torrent of surplus cash and
we've always had a torrent of surplus
cash and we're always looking for
intelligent things to do with it
and if we find things that are
intelligent to do we do it and if we
don't find anything we let the cash
build up what the hell is wrong with
that
not much yeah not much is right so I
know that you guys have talked about
England or it seems that you have
because Warren talked about doing this
article in the FT is basically a way of
signaling potential interests given that
brexit may create some opportunities is
that the case what the hell do I know
about brexit I don't even know how voted
on it over in England I don't know much
about it but will react opportunities
wherever they are and we were the
vicissitudes of politics as it's just
what they are but it is a little bit
more than a vicissitude to drop out of
the European Union I mean it's a good
deal this country was enormous Lee
helped before all the colonies together
we had internal tariffs against each
little colony the United States would
not be as big as it is so it's
understandable what Europe wanted to get
together and addition to the advantages
they got from the free trade they had a
long history of having wars and we all
sort of one big place trading with one
other it'll be safer those were very
good ideas I'm not quarreling with the
basic ideas on the other hand if you
have unlimited immigration from one
country to another that caused us lots
of strains look at Germany Merkel
brought in more immigration than her
people she wanted
she was leading a parade and she looked
back and nobody was following so these
very few people want unlimited
immigration of a different culture it
doesn't mean we made it work in America
but we had a vacant continent to work on
that was easy
bacon rich oil minerals wonderful soil
should we still be letting immigrants
into this country I think we should have
way more control of our borders than we
do isn't that John promise right on that
like the Democrats are committing
suicide by being so they hate him so
much that they're against him even when
he's right it seems like the borders is
conflated with immigration policy
sometimes that right I mean and of
course they are yeah and but I think we
all they have some control over
immigration some effective control I
think the bulk of the people want to be
very nice to the people that are already
here including all the people from Latin
America but they want more control over
the inflows are you concerned about this
rise of somewhat nationalistic
leadership around the world like in
Turkey in Brazil in China in the United
States arguably well take Brazil who L
would like Brazil it's a great climate
in a great country but there's bring it
up to a fare-thee-well
you mean the new leader or just what's
happened pretty what's happened
generally yeah okay so does that require
a strong man to take over though well I
don't think I've got deep knowledge on
exactly what works well and the internal
politics of every other country who
would have guessed that the Chinese
Communists would improve their big
country as much as they have in the last
thirty years that's the price you
well they didn't the first 20 years they
had the Cultural Revolution it was crazy
and now they have
one of the greatest success records in
the history of mankind I don't know
about you but I did not predict it I
didn't but but what so what is the
secret to China's success then they
copied Singapore which is member the
Communist leader said I don't care if
the cat is black or why they care
whether it catches mice and they copied
a very wonderful famous Chinese man in
Singapore and lo and behold they they
found the right they found the right
Chinese leadership outside of China
which amuses me no it was Chinese but
look at the way it worked in the whole
history of the world no nation that big
has ever advanced that fast and they did
it by having a bunch of poor people say
half their income they did not use the
wealth of the rich world to get ahead
they they use the savings of poor people
I am a huge admirer of what the Chinese
have accomplished and I give them did
you ask me who is the one man who did
the most for China
it was Lim Kuan Yew Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore they copied him are you still
saying Lin about the future for China
right now there's a lot of concerns
about slowing growth and leverage in the
system I'm quite optimistic
they've been succeeding for a long time
sure they have ups and downs and they
make mistakes as well as good decisions
but if the average amount the Chinese
are getting ahead they're not moving
backward what do you think the economic
relationship between China and the
United States looks like say two years
from now
well if both sides have any sense they
will be better and better friends and
adjust all differences you just start
raving madness on either side not to
make a friend or the other really
powerful nation on earth I want to ask
you a little bit about some Silicon
Valley stuff I mean you said yesterday
you were ashamed of missing on Google
yeah I
we could see if we look carefully at our
own companies that their advertising is
working way better than other
advertising just we weren't paying
enough attention so is it too late I
don't know I don't know everything you
know well we'll leave that aside but you
know you look at these tech investments
so they're Apple now Amazon did you know
about the Amazon purchase were you
involved in that decision no of course
not
I've never owned a share of Amazon I am
a huge admirer of Basil's I think he's
been sort of like Lee Kuan Yew he's a
leader that's all by himself he's
perfectly amazing human leader but it's
always been too complicated and
uncertain for my particular temperament
oh it's interesting and I find all the
things to do that'll work fine someone
was telling me the other day that they
thought that you could actually sort of
think of Apple and Amazon not as
technology companies so much but as big
branded growth businesses which would be
something that would be appealing to you
oh they're both right brands and
technologies it's hard to separate the
effect of one from the other
okay and as far as what's going on in
Silicon Valley right now with IPOs
unicorns going public and not having any
profitability or any prospect of
profitability in the near term what do
you think of that situation well there
are a lot of things they don't think
about and one of them is companies are
losing two or three billion dollars here
and going public it's it's not my scene
have you looked so you're not interested
in uber companies like that necessarily
well I'm have to be interested with that
important then sweep the world wouldn't
share its practice but I don't have to
invest in everything I'm interested in
I'm looking for things where I think I
can predict what's going to happen with
a high degree of accuracy and I have no
feeling that I have
do that with uber right I want to ask
you about architecture which is
something you've been interested in for
a while how did you get interested in
that and what is your current well I
have a choice as an architect and it's
I've always thought it was the queen of
the Arts in other words I think
architecture does more good than
painting or sculpture so I think
architecture is hugely important very
interesting and does such an enormous
good when it's done right so I'm a big
admirer of of the of the potentiality of
the profession but I think that I think
a lot of people go into architecture
because they're sort of frustrated
sculptors and they don't think with
enough common sense or uncommon sense
about what the hell are doing what are
some projects that you've been involved
with them oh I've built houses I've
built office buildings I've built
apartment but how's that I've helped
charities and educational institutions
build things
I built science centers I do a lot of
but I like it
is this a creative outlet for you yes
absolutely
do you have some projects that you're
working on right now some are core
projects what are they about
well I'm working on Brody UCSB
University of California at Santa
Barbara and and it's basically housing
but of several kinds I want to shift
gears and ask you a little bit about
repurchasing shares you said in the
shareholder meeting I predict will get a
little more liberal in repurchasing
shares how much more aggressive will you
get and do you think that's going to be
a problem potentially with the Democrats
well
a politician is a business of howling
about something trying to create a sense
of outrage they're always complaining
about something but and it is true that
a lot of people it got so popular
purchase shares that some people hurts
them
repurchase them even when they were too
high-priced we will never do that we're
only gonna buy them back if they're too
cheap and but of course that ought to be
done if you had a partnership of three
of your crippled relatives and one of
them needed some money wouldn't you buy
out the cripple broke with the company's
money
it's just simple morality so but I do
think it's being overdone by some people
and it undoubtedly is being done to prop
up values which I regard it's an
improper use of the share repurchasing
technique should there be laws about
that no there are laws and and but we
shouldn't be telling people what the
right price is right
so I want to ask you a little bit about
the social safety net we were talking
about and Medicare and do you support
Medicare for all would that be something
you'd be interested in well I'm one of
the few Republicans you'll ever talk to
it it thinks we should have a
single-payer system but not one of the
type that we're trying to get if you
look at the single-payer system of
Singapore it costs 20% of what ours cost
and that's an advanced civilization come
nation and of course the people are a
lot healthier well of course I'd rather
spend 80% less and have the people
healthier and of course I'd like to have
American manufacturers not have this
terrible burden of unnecessary health
costs affects their competitors in the
world so we have an insane medical
system that grew like Topsy by accident
with the help of a lot of dumb
governmental intervention not all of it
was dumb but so it was and and the
system is ridiculous
if a young family has to pay a $5,000
deductible to have a baby they don't
really have medical insurance it isn't
just the Medicare that's wrong the whole
damn system is going wrong and the
amount of unnecessary tests and
unnecessary prolongation of inevitable
death that's going on is a national
disgrace of course I don't like it have
you ever thought about moving to
Singapore charlie
well no but I'd like to move some of
Singapore's results in to the United
States they have practically no deaths
from opioids they have a low crime rate
they have no debt of the whole country
yeah no no they're doing a lot right I
wish to hell our politicians in both
parties would spend a lot more time
studying Singapore but some people say
many people say it's an authoritarian
government there's no there's a lack of
freedom there it's a democracy it just
does such a good job the people keep
reelecting it that's that I like that
result what the hell's wrong with the
head I was with some people just a few
minutes ago actually and they were kind
of recounting some of your zingers do
you spend time before the meeting say oh
I've got like these six zingers I'm
going to get out during the annual me
ever think of all the people you know
that I've tried to take one extra step
of falling off a cliff well I'm not
happy now
that's just come to you yes I think the
meetings worked better if they're
spontaneous if we were scripting things
I don't think people would like it so
you and Warren don't say anything at all
before you sit down zero you have no
idea what's gonna happen that is correct
that's fantastic so I want to ask you
just a question or two about growing up
and you were at the University of
Michigan and you dropped out and joined
the army right I certainly did and we
all did in those days yes so how did
that do the army influenced you
well everything influences you in your
past life and yes of course that
includes me I never wanted to be in a
big bureaucracy I was well toward the
bottom I finally got to be a second
lieutenant in the army I was way down on
the ranks and nobody gave a damn what I
thought about any subject they just gave
me a little job to do when I was
supposed to do it and of course I didn't
like that as well as having a free rein
to control my own destiny and so on so I
am much better adapted to being a
capitalist operator than I am to being a
cog in a bureaucracy did you ever get in
trouble in the army of course tell us
about that well my senior officers could
tell I thought they were wrong and I
tried to hide it and they could still
tell and so of course they who likes a
junior officer you look over there and
he's plainly indicating he thinks you're
an idiot so that didn't work out too
well
well it worked out all right I did my
work well enough so they didn't bother
me but it was it was not a milieu where
I was going to succeed right so how did
you figure out a lot of people look at
your life and you know would want to
emulate what you've done is that
something that people can do look at
someone like yourself and see your path
I mean you're in real estate law than
invest
what do you even consider yourself a
businessman how would you describe what
you do well I don't consider myself I
think my way of thinking will work for
anybody of trying to be very rational
and disciplined so I think that much but
to flit around the various careers and
going to the other fellows professional
territory and trying out do him and do
all kinds of things like that I think
will not work for most people and so I
always tell I'm always being visited by
a young man who say I I'm practicing law
and I don't like it I'd rather be a
billionaire how can I do it and I tell
him well I'll tell you a story a young
man goes to see Mozart and he says
Mozart I want to start composing
symphonies and Mozart said how old are
you in the ice is 22 and he said you're
too young to do symphonies my guy says
yes but you were 10 years old when you
were composing some of these and most of
it says yes but I wasn't running around
asking other people how to do it right
so I think that's floating around
business is something not everybody
should try yeah I think if I tried it
again it might not have worked as well
you said just figure out my way why were
you were lucky yeah I think I had some
luck yes well but I think there's more
to it than that I mean where were you
yes the combination of luck and skill
that's what all good records are right
so let me just ask you a few more
questions and do you you eat all that
peanut brittle up there right yeah is
that your one peanut brittle day or do
you know really yeah so the other 364
days you don't eat much of it they put
it there I think they it's warna so
business like he likes promoting peanut
brittle the annual meeting well don't
the other Berkshire brands get jealous
and say once you put like a railroad
train up there or something like that we
got a whole exhibit hall full of other
brands promoting one another at the
bursar meeting
you cannot claim that were under
promoting I would never claim that but
you you know that the Koch people and
the C's people get special placement up
there yes they do but those are two-way
C's was our first great brand and Koch
is one of the great it's a great drink
soft drink brand of the world so they're
entitled to we have a special place to
other companies asked to get put up
there though well they all push
themselves forward as much as we'll let
them is that a yes yes they of course
they want to be pushed up and and
finally charlie i want to ask you a
little bit about philanthropy and you
know it seems like war has been sort of
a little bit more upfront above that
about that with Bill Gates and The
Giving Pledge and I know you're
philanthropic as well what is your
thinking on that how up well I wouldn't
sign the Gibbon because I have already
transferred so much to my children that
I've already violated it so I think I'm
asking I'm seeking false credit if I
joined them on say I'm a big
philanthropist is gonna get more than
half of my wealth to charity I've
already given more than half of it to my
children so I can't join them it's like
coming back from the dead I can't do it
but doesn't that make Warren mad coming
to Australia shut mad when is Warren mad
about somebody else's Warren thanks to
each Berkshire either way to do with his
own money what are you damn pleases so
let me just follow up on that what you
did then what was your thinking in terms
of giving them up giving away money like
that though would simply itself I had a
wonderful wife most wives worried that
the husband that he survives will get
involved with some nurse or something in
his dotage and the money will go away
from the children and I knew that my
dead wife would have preferred to have
the money go to the children so I
arranged that she got her wish right so
any thoughts on how the meeting is going
to be different next year I mean when do
you start talking about that or do you
even talk about that
meaning we never talked about it we just
do what works as long as it works and
when it stops working her indicates it's
going to stop working and we'll stop did
Apple say they want to have some exhibit
in the convention center this year I had
no discussion with them I don't have any
idea what they're doing and do you see a
time when Ajit and Gregg and Ted and
Todd will come up there with you at some
point I don't know how it will morph I
don't think that what worked in one era
has to be duplicated in another I don't
think what we're doing would work for
many people I think it was an historical
accident who we didn't do it on purpose
we just sort of drifted into it when it
worked we fanned the flames but we
didn't create it with any forethought
and I think some later generation will
have some different system I think
there's more wise a Sri in our meeting
then it would be appropriate forever
no I'm the principal wiseass yeah you
are Charlie Munger vice chairman of
Berkshire my class wiseass all right
thanks very much for joining us I'm Andy
serwer you've been watching influencers
we'll see you next time
you